JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
STEVE INSKEEP: And I'm Steve
Inskeep.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
DONALD TRUMP (R),
President-Elect: I saw the
information.
I read the information outside
of that meeting.
It's all fake news.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In his first news
conference
as president-elect, Donald Trump
takes on
reports of Russian spying,
questions over
conflicts of interest with his
business, and
much more.
STEVE INSKEEP: Also ahead: His
choice for
secretary of state faced
questions at a confirmation
hearing.
Rex Tillerson was asked if
Russia's Vladimir
Putin is a war criminal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus, we continue
our series
The Obama Years with a look at
the president's
efforts to fight climate change.
CAROL BROWNER, Former Assistant
to the President
for Energy and Climate Change: I
think that
this president believes that
climate change
is real.
He believes there is a moral and
ethical imperative
to act.
STEVE INSKEEP: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
We are having some guests join
me here at
the "NewsHour" anchor desk in
the coming weeks.
Tonight, it is Steve Inskeep,
who many of
you recognize from NPR's
"Morning Edition."
Welcome, Steve.
STEVE INSKEEP: I'm delighted to
be here.
It's an honor.
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We're so glad to
have you.
And we are devoting much of
tonight's program
to our lead story, and that is
the Donald
Trump news conference today.
It came amid a swirl of stories
about the
president-elect and Russia.
DONALD TRUMP (R),
President-Elect: It's all
fake news.
It's phony stuff.
It didn't happen.
And it was gotten by opponents
of ours.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At his first news
conference
since the election, Donald Trump
flatly denied
the Russians have any
compromising information
on him.
DONALD TRUMP: But it should
never have been
released, but I read what was
released.
And I think it's a disgrace.
I think it's an absolute
disgrace.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The bombshell
burst Tuesday
evening, when CNN reported the
president-elect
and President Obama were briefed
on the matter
last week.
The report included
unsubstantiated claims
that Russian intelligence
compiled a dossier
on Mr. Trump during visits to
Moscow.
The Web site BuzzFeed then
published a 35-page
cache of memos from the alleged
dossier, including
a claim of sexual activity
caught on a Moscow
hotel room surveillance camera.
The New York Times and other
major news organizations
said they had been aware of the
information
for months, but could not verify
the claims.
Today, Mr. Trump insisted he
wouldn't put
himself in such a position.
DONALD TRUMP: I told many
people, be careful,
because you don't want to see
yourself on
television.
There are cameras all over the
place, and,
again, not just Russia, all
over.
Does anyone really believe that
story?
I'm also very much of a
germaphobe, by the
way, believe me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: From there, the
president-elect
lit into the news media again.
He condemned BuzzFeed.
DONALD TRUMP: It's a failing
pile of garbage
writing it.
I think they're going to suffer
the consequences.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And he accused
CNN of being
fake news, and brushed off
persistent attempts
by its correspondent to ask a
question.
Later, CNN's parent company,
Time Warner,
defended its reporting, and
BuzzFeed said
it published what it called a
newsworthy document.
As for the leak itself:
DONALD TRUMP: I think it was
disgraceful,
disgraceful that the
intelligence agencies
allowed any information that
turned out to
be so false and fake out.
I think it's a disgrace, and I
say that.
And that's something that Nazi
Germany would
have done, and did do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On Russian
hacking more broadly,
the president-elect suggested an
upside to
the probing of Democratic Party
computers
and e-mails.
DONALD TRUMP: The hacking is bad
and it shouldn't
be done.
But look at the things that were
hacked.
Look at what was learned from
that hacking,
that Hillary Clinton got the
questions to
the debate and didn't report it?
That's a horrible thing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Likewise, he
acknowledged the
intelligence verdict that
President Vladimir
Putin ordered the hacking, but
he didn't leave
it there.
DONALD TRUMP: I think it was
Russia, but I
think we also get hacked by
other countries
and other people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And looking
ahead, Mr. Trump
suggested the hacking will not
necessarily
hinder future cooperation with
Putin.
DONALD TRUMP: If Putin likes
Donald Trump,
guess what, folks?
That's called an asset, not a
liability.
Now, Russia will have much
greater respect
for our country when I'm leading
it than when
other people have led it.
You will see that.
Russia will respect our country
more.
He shouldn't have done it.
I don't believe he will be doing
it more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There were also
questions about
the Trump Organization's
business ties to
Russia, and he denied there are
any.
DONALD TRUMP: We could make
deals in Russia
very easily if we wanted to.
I just don't want to, because I
think that
would be a conflict.
So I have no loans, no dealings
and no current
pending deals.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mr. Trump has not
released
tax returns to verify his
claims, and he said
again he won't do so until a
federal audit
is finished.
He also declined to say whether
his associates
or campaign staff had contact
with Russian
officials during the campaign.
An ABC reporter tweeted later
that the president-elect
denied any such contact after
the news conference
ended.
We take a closer look at Russia,
the president-elect,
and these latest revelations
with former attorney
at the National Security Agency
Susan Hennessey.
She is now a fellow at the
Brookings Institution
and is managing editor for the
Web site Lawfare
about the intersection of the
law and national
security.
And John Sipher, he served
almost 30 years
at the CIA, both in the agency's
clandestine
service and executive ranks.
He was stationed in Moscow in
the 1990s and
he ran the CIA's Russia program
for three
years.
He's now at CrossLead, a
consulting firm.
And welcome to both of you.
So let's start, Susan Hennessey,
but I just
want to ask both of you in
brief, what do
you make of this report?
SUSAN HENNESSEY, Brookings
Institution: Right.
So, for the moment, the real
story is the
allegations themselves are
unverified.
They're obviously quite
salacious in nature.
The real story is that the
intelligence community
thought it was appropriate to
brief the president
of the United States and the
president-elect.
That means that serious people
are taking
this seriously.
That's different than saying
that the intelligence
community believes the
allegations or has
substantiated them.
But this is a matter that is not
just simply
a matter of fake news or
something that we
should disregard.
It clearly passes some degree of
preliminary
credibility.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Sipher, your
take?
JOHN SIPHER, Former CIA Officer:
I think the
question is, is this real?
And there are things on the
positive side
and the negative side on that.
On the positive side, for those
of us who
have lived and worked and worked
in Russia
and against the Russians, it
does feel right.
It does feel like the kind of
thing that Russians
do.
A lot of those details fit.
Also, I think, the author has
some credibility,
which is on the positive side.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This is the
former British
intelligence officer.
JOHN SIPHER: That's right.
Yes.
On the negative side, it really
is hard to
make a distinction if we don't
know who those
sources are.
He talks about his sources
providing various
information.
In the CIA, before we would put
out a report
like that, an intelligence
report, there could
be, you know, hundreds of pages
of information
on that person's access, on
their suitability,
on their personality.
We don't have that.
And, secondly, the fact that a
lot of this
reporting is the presidential
administration
in Russia and the Kremlin is a
little bit
worrying, because, I mean,
that's essentially
a hard nut to crack.
And U.S. intelligence agencies
have been trying
to do that for years, and the
fact that he
has this much data about them
does put it
into question a little bit.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Susan Hennessey,
let's talk
about your organization,
Lawfare.
You had a copy of this, what,
several weeks
ago.
And you started looking into it,
decided not
to put it out, but you did look
into it.
How did you go about figuring
out or trying
to figure out what's real and
what isn't here?
SUSAN HENNESSEY: Right.
So, the document was shared with
us to -- so
that we could provide some
professional input
as to whether or not it was
credible.
As we were satisfied that the
relevant government
entities were aware of the
documents, and
then like everybody else, we
attempted to
talk to people in various
communities to see
whether or not the allegations
seemed credible
to them.
I think the point that we're at
now, it's
really not about our
organization or anyone
else verifying the specific
facts.
The FBI is conducting an
investigation.
We will expect -- there are very
specific
allegations in this document.
Those allegations can either be
proven true
or proven false.
And so we should expect some
answers that
provide some additional clarity.
One important note is just
because a single
fact in the document is true, it
doesn't mean
the rest of the document is
true.
And just because a single fact
in the document
is false, that doesn't mean the
rest of the
document is false.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That the entire
thing is false.
Well, John Sipher, let's go back
to what you
said a minute ago.
You said there are parts of this
that are
credible, and you said it's the
way the Russians
operate.
What did you mean by that?
JOHN SIPHER: It must look odd to
views or
anybody who has read this thing.
It's such a different world.
But Russia is a police state.
Russia has been a police state
for much of
its history.
And this is the way they often
do business.
They collect blackmail on
people.
When I lived there, we had audio
and video
in our houses.
We were followed all the time.
Restaurants and places, hotels
like this are
-- have video and audio in them.
They collect this.
They do psychological profiling
of people
to try to see who might be
sources for them.
This is just the way the
Russians operate.
So when you read this, it smacks
of the kind
of thing that we would believe
is credible.
That doesn't mean it is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The methods.
JOHN SIPHER: Right, the methods,
right, and
the -- right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you went on
to say that
the precise details in here are
not borne
out, are not verified by any
individuals outside
of this report, the British --
the British
office.
JOHN SIPHER: Right.
And in that sense, it's
difficult because
of the hyperpartisan atmosphere
here.
The fact that this is now in the
public is
going to spin up on the
salacious details
and these type of things,
whereas I think
the FBI does have a lot of
experience doing
very sensitive investigations
like this, working
with partners overseas and
others to try to
put this together, because there
are a lot
of details that we as citizens
can't follow
up on.
Did people travel during those
certain days?
Who are these people?
And that's the kind of stuff
that we just
can't do, and the FBI can and
will.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For example,
Susan Hennessey,
there's a reference in here to
an attempt
to get the FISA court, the court
that has
to OK investigations,
surveillance of individuals,
permission for them to look at
four different
people who were working for the
Trump campaign,
the Trump Organization.
How unusual would something like
that be?
SUSAN HENNESSEY: So, certainly,
it's highly
unusual in the context of a
political campaign
or a presidential election.
That said, there is news reports
that perhaps
there were additional attempts
to secure a
FISA warrant, and that the FBI
reportedly
obtained one in October.
If the allegations in the
documents are true,
are accurate, those are the
kinds of things
that would fall within FISA.
That's the type of warrant that
the government
would pursue.
That said, just like everything
else, we're
a step away from actually
verifying the substance
of that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Verifying.
John Sipher, if you're in charge
of the investigation
to figure out what is and what
isn't right,
if anything is accurate in here,
what do you
need to do now?
JOHN SIPHER: What you need to do
is take each
piece of this document and run
it to ground.
So, you need to find out -- they
talk -- the
issue here is not the salacious
details, the
blackmail piece.
The issue here is the criminal
behavior if
people in the Trump campaign
were working
with Russian intelligence to
collect information
on Americans.
If that's the case, there's a
lot of detail
in there that needs to be
verified.
And we have to find out, did the
people travel
on the days they said they
traveled, those
type of things?
So, there are a lot of things to
run down
that you can run down with your
partners and
information that you can collect
as part of
an investigation in U.S. travel
records, all
these type of things.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Susan Hennessey,
what would
you add to that?
If you were involved in trying
to determine
if any parts of this are
accurate or to verify
that they're not accurate, how
would do you
that?
SUSAN HENNESSEY: Right.
So, certainly, the FBI is going
to be calling
on all of their resources to
investigate the
specific allegations, things
like travel records,
things like financial documents.
They're also going to need to
draw on intelligence
sources.
And so there are specific sort
of comments
about meetings between Putin and
others, very
sort of high-level, high-value
intelligence
targets.
They would really need to reach
very deeply
into their intelligence networks
and the networks
of allied intelligence agencies
in order to
see if anything to lend
credibility or substantiate
these very serious allegations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Sipher, we
saw that Senator
John McCain had a role, the
Republican senator,
of course, from Arizona, had a
role in this.
How did he come into this, and
does that tell
us anything?
JOHN SIPHER: Well, Senator
McCain, obviously,
has a lot of experience working
with the government
on sensitive things and has
always been a
hawk on Russia issues.
And I'm supportive of that.
I think he's been good in that
case.
My understanding is the author
of this himself
provided information, this
information to
get to the FBI, through Mr.
McCain, who got
the information through the FBI.
And, obviously, other news
places had it.
What's interesting is President
Trump, president-elect
Trump seems to think that the
intelligence
agencies themselves leaked this
information,
whereas it doesn't seem to me
that that's
the case.
The fact that you and others
have had this
for so long and actually held
off on putting
it suggests to me that this
information has
been out there for a while, and
I think that's
why General Clapper and others
briefed the
president-elect on this last
Friday.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What would you
add to that?
SUSAN HENNESSEY: So, I think
this is an incredibly
important point.
So, when President-elect Trump
today seemed
to suggest that he believes the
intelligence
community leaked this, saying it
would be
a blot if they had done so,
there's absolutely
no indication that the
intelligence community
is the source of the documents.
BuzzFeed, the organization that
published
this document, this is actually
not even an
intelligence community document.
It is a private company.
It's not even classified
material.
And so a little bit, there is a
suspicion
that once again Donald Trump is
using his
personal attacks on the
intelligence community
a little bit to divert attention
away from
the substance of the
allegations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very quickly to
both of you,
how confident are you that we're
going to
know eventually whether this is
-- whether
any of this is accurate?
JOHN SIPHER: I have confidence.
Yes, I have confidence that the
FBI is going
to follow this through.
My nervousness is that these
kind of things
are going to dribble and drabble
out for the
next several years and cause a
real problem
for this administration going
forward.
SUSAN HENNESSEY: Because this is
so important
to the credibility of the
president, we would
really want to see him establish
some kind
of independent commission or
council in order
to really get to the bottom of
these facts
and provide some reassurance to
the American
people, not only that this is
being investigated,
but also that president-elect
Trump himself
is taking this matter very
seriously.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Susan Hennessey,
John Sipher,
we thank you both.
JOHN SIPHER: Thank you.
STEVE INSKEEP: Now, during his
press conference,
the president-elect said
something that no
president-elect may have said
before.
He said he had just turned down
a multibillion-dollar
business deal.
DONALD TRUMP (R),
President-Elect: Over the
weekend, I was offered $2
billion to do a
deal in Dubai with a very, very,
very amazing
man, a great, great developer
from the Middle
East, Hussain Damac, a friend of
mine, great
guy.
And I was offered $2 billion to
do a deal
in Dubai, a number of deals.
And I turned it down.
STEVE INSKEEP: Now, $2 billion,
his friend
Hussain Damac was apparently a
man with a
different last name, who runs a
company called
DAMAC Group.
But, nevertheless, the talk of a
deal in a
key Persian Gulf nation, days
before he moves
into the White House, suggests
the clash between
the president's duties and his
worldwide business.
The president-elect says he has
a plan to
manage those conflicts, which
we're going
to evaluate this evening.
That plan includes turning the
business over
to his two older sons, plus a
business executive.
His sons aren't supposed to tell
him what
they're doing.
And the president-elect will
step back from
management, but remain the owner
of Trump
Organization, and the company
will avoid new
overseas business deals.
Mr. Trump said he's doing this,
even though
the law would allow him to keep
making deals
as president.
DONALD TRUMP: I don't like the
way that looks,
but I would be able to do that
if I wanted
to.
I would be the only one that
would be able
to do that.
You can't do that in any other
capacity.
But, as a president, I could run
the Trump
Organization, great, great
company, and I
could run the company -- the
country.
I would do a very good job, but
I don't want
to do that.
STEVE INSKEEP: The
president-elect is correct
that a federal conflict of
interest law excludes
the president, but what about
all the other
issues?
We have brought in two lawyers
who managed
ethics issues for two
presidents.
Richard Painter did it for
President George
W. Bush.
Norm Eisen did it for President
Obama.
And, Mr. Eisen, let's start with
you.
The president-elect suggests he
is going above
and beyond.
Is he?
NORMAN EISEN, Former Special
Counsel to President
Obama: No.
He's going beneath and below the
minimum floor
that's required by law, that's
required by
our most fundamental law, the
Constitution,
that is established by what
every president
for four decades has done, that
ethics require
and that common sense requires,
Steve.
This was a sad day.
I wasn't happy to see what
happened here.
But what the president has
announced fails
every aspect of the bipartisan
consensus that
has emerged on what he should
do, and it's
going to lead to scandal and
corruption and
a constitutional crisis from the
moment he's
sworn in.
STEVE INSKEEP: OK, you mentioned
the law.
You mentioned common sense.
Let's talk about common sense
here a little
bit here, Richard Painter.
We will get to the law.
What is wrong with turning over
management
of the company to his sons, who
it is said
will act independently of him?
RICHARD PAINTER, Former
Associate Counsel
to President George W. Bush:
Well, he will
still own the company.
And the problem is the company,
the Trump
Organization, has business deals
all over
the world.
And some may be getting turned
down, although
some might get accepted.
There are already deals in
place.
There are deals with powerful
politicians
in Indonesia, with oligarchs in
the Philippines,
deals in Turkey.
I mean, these are parts of the
world where
there's very important issues to
be dealt
with on behalf of the United
States and strategic
concerns.
We can't have the president have
substantial
economic exposure himself in
these countries
and business partners who may be
in league
with foreign governments.
This is an enormous conflict of
interests.
We also have the president of
the president's
name being on buildings around
the world in
places where it's questionable
whether these
other countries can protect
those buildings.
We don't have the Obama Tower in
downtown
Paris or Nairobi or some place.
And we couldn't protect it.
And then we put the Trump name
up.
That's going to be jeopardizing
the lives
of the people who live in those
buildings
and could drag the United States
into a conflict.
That's only the beginnings of
the problems.
We have potential mixing Trump
business with
United States government
business.
And that would trigger a bribery
investigation.
And then we, of course, have
those payments
coming in from foreign
governments and companies
controlled by foreign
governments that violate
the Constitution, unless they
sweep all of
those out of the Trump
Organization as of
January 20.
And they don't have the time to
do it.
STEVE INSKEEP: You mentioned
also the Constitution,
and I definitely want to get to
that, but
let's just refer to something
else that Norm
Eisen mentioned.
Norm Eisen said that this
arrangement violates
the bipartisan consensus about
ethics for
the president of the United
States in recent
decades.
The president-elect, however,
brought out
a lawyer -- Sheri Dillon is her
name -- at
this press conference, and she
dismissed some
of the more conventional
solutions.
Let's watch.
SHERI DILLON, Attorney for
Donald Trump: Some
people have suggested a blind
trust, but you
cannot have a totally blind
trust with operating
businesses.
President Trump can't un-know he
owns Trump
Tower.
And the press will make sure
that any new
developments at the Trump
Organization are
well publicized.
Further, it would be impossible
to find an
institutional trustee that would
be competent
to run the Trump Organization.
The approach he is taking allows
Don and Eric
to preserve this great company
and its iconic
assets.
STEVE INSKEEP: Norm Eisen, I
have actually
heard this from a lot of people,
who said,
blind trust, how can that be
possible, because
his assets are so visible?
His name is on buildings.
The name itself is the asset.
Is she right that a blind trust
isn't going
to work?
NORMAN EISEN: No, she's wrong on
all three
of those points.
On the first point, if it's a
problem that
he would still know things in a
blind trust,
how much more of a problem is it
now, where
he has this completely
unprecedented continuing
ownership interest, and very
weak protections
that were outlined today for
communications
between and among his sons?
Does anybody really believe that
they're not
going to be talking about the
business?
Then, number two, it actually
would be simple
to do this.
All Trump needs to do -- this is
not complicated
-- find an independent
professional trustee.
There are plenty out there who
have dealt
with far more complications.
This is -- the Trump
Organization is just
a big international family
business.
Trump signs it over.
This is what we hoped in a
bipartisan way
and prayed would happen today.
He signs it over to the trustee.
The trustee figures out, what
can I sell?
How do I sell it?
What can I borrow?
Maybe I do a public equity, so
if it's not
sold on the market, the
executives buy it,
package the less-indebted
properties with
the more-indebted properties.
Donald Trump has enough to worry
about without
thinking about that.
And then, on the third point of
destroying
the business, the Donald Trump
name is at
an all-time high.
This is the best time to make
these moves.
When the corruptions and the
scandals start
to flow, it's going to be much
harder.
But he is going to have to do
it, because
those negative consequences are
sure to follow.
STEVE INSKEEP: OK, just very
briefly here
now, the law.
You mentioned the law.
You mentioned the Constitution.
You have said that the president
would violate
the Constitution if he continues
on this course.
The Emoluments Clause is what
you're talking
about.
It prohibits gifts from a
foreign government.
But the president-elect's lawyer
says nobody
has defined a gift before for
that purpose.
And she says the president doing
business
is not a gift.
SHERI DILLON: No one would have
thought, when
the Constitution was written,
that paying
your hotel bill was an
emolument.
Instead, it would have been
thought of as
a value-for-value exchange, not
a gift, not
a title, and not an emolument.
But since president-elect Trump
has been elected,
some people want to define
emoluments to cover
routine business transactions
like paying
for hotel rooms.
They suggest that the
Constitution prohibits
the businesses from even
arm's-length transactions
that the president-elect has
absolutely nothing
to do with and isn't even aware
of.
These people are wrong.
This is not what the
Constitution says.
Paying for a hotel room is not a
gift or a
present, and it has nothing to
do with an
office.
It's not an emolument.
STEVE INSKEEP: Richard Painter,
what's wrong
with that logic?
It's routine business.
RICHARD PAINTER: This is a
for-profit hotel.
He is making profits over
dealing with foreign
governments.
Same with the loans from foreign
government-owned
banks.
Those are for a for-profit
business.
That is prohibited under the
Emoluments Clause
of the Constitution.
Now, she's right on one point,
that you can't
take the Trump Tower, put it in
a trust, and
pretend you don't have it.
Of course, the trustee will have
to sell the
Trump Tower.
He needs to make a decision,
does he wants
to be president, or does he want
to be a landlord
and a hotel owner?
He has nine days to make that
decision.
I thought he'd already made it.
But that's what this is about.
He just doesn't want to give up
the hotel.
He doesn't want to give Trump
Tower to his
son or sell it.
And it is not that difficult to
sell a nice
building like that on Fifth
Avenue.
STEVE INSKEEP: Norm Eisen, very
briefly, can
the president-elect resolve some
of these
concerns just by being a lot
more transparent
about who is paying what for
what?
NORMAN EISEN: Well, Professor
Painter and
I laid out yesterday a scorecard
of five criteria.
And one of them was to have
strong ethics
provisions with strong
transparency around
them, an ethics firewall.
But we made the point that alone
is not enough.
He is going to be -- as
Professor Painter
says, emoluments covers all of
the different
benefits that he's getting,
loans, permits,
trademarks, other things outside
the hotel,
selling apartments to foreign
government agents
and sovereigns.
He's going to be in violation of
the Constitution
on day one, and no amount of
transparency
can cure that offense against
our founding
document.
STEVE INSKEEP: Could they solve
some of this
problem by releasing the
president-elect's
tax return?
NORMAN EISEN: It's critical that
the tax returns
come out, particularly today,
when there's
been so much talk about Russia,
Steve.
Professor Painter and I wrote
during the campaign
that there's an enormous amount
of information
about foreign governments,
gifts, payments,
partnerships, even business
expenses, possibly,
in deductions taken.
Given the nature of the Russia
allegations,
we need to see that.
And Richard and I said today
that all Russia-related
aspects of the tax returns
should be released.
And the Intelligence Committees
should get
the full tax returns to put
these Russia allegations
to bed.
STEVE INSKEEP: Norm Eisen was
the top ethics
lawyer for President Obama.
Richard Painter was the top
ethics lawyers
for President George W. Bush.
Gentlemen, thanks to you both.
NORMAN EISEN: Thanks, Steve.
RICHARD PAINTER: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The
president-elect made news
on a number of other fronts
today.
Our John Yang was in the room
this morning,
and he joins us now from Trump
Tower.
So, John, as we said before,
it's been a long
time since Mr. Trump had had a
news conference,
almost six months.
Before you tell us what more he
said, give
us a sense of the room, the
scene.
JOHN YANG: It was in the lobby
here of Trump
Tower, the pink marble lobby of
the tower.
It was standing room only.
Two hours before the session
began, all the
seats had already been claimed,
reporters,
photographers, camera crews from
all around
the globe.
And it was if there was a
pent-up demand to
ask questions of the
president-elect.
And Mr. Trump didn't disappoint.
In addition to all the big
headlines that
you have already talked about,
he made news
on some other fronts, on
Obamacare, for example.
He said he wants to move quickly
to repeal
and replace at the same time,
even though
some key lawmakers of his own
party say that
may be hard to do.
He says he's going to unveil his
own proposal
as a replacement as soon as
Representative
Tom Price is confirmed as his
health and human
services secretary.
DONALD TRUMP (R),
President-Elect: So, the
easiest thing would be to let it
implode in
'17.
And, believe me, we'd get pretty
much whatever
we wanted.
But it would take a long time.
We're going to be submitting, as
soon as our
secretary is approved, almost
simultaneously,
shortly thereafter, a plan.
It will be repeal and replace.
It will be essentially
simultaneously.
It will be various segments, you
understand,
but will most likely be on the
same day or
the same week, but probably the
same day.
JOHN YANG: Now, that Price
nomination has
run into some headwinds over
questions about
his selling and trading health
care-related
stocks while he sits on the Ways
and Means
Committee.
Some Democrats say they want to
know if he
profited from insider
information.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, another area
where he
made news had to do with filling
that vacancy
on the Supreme Court after the
death of Justice
Antonin Scalia almost a year
ago, during which
time Republicans didn't go along
with President
Obama's nominee.
JOHN YANG: That's right.
And folks may remember that, in
September,
during the campaign, Mr. Trump
released a
list of 21 possible nominees.
He said today that he's already
begun interviewing
some of those candidates, and he
said he will
make his nomination to fill the
court vacancy
within two weeks after he's
inaugurated.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John, he also
spoke about the
issue that really helped launch
his campaign,
building the border wall with
Mexico.
JOHN YANG: That's right, that
signature issue
of the campaign.
He said that Mexico is going to
pay for it
one way or another.
He said he doesn't want to wait
and negotiate
with Mexico about how they're
going to pick
up the tab.
He said he wants to start
building right away.
And Vice President Mike Pence is
in charge
of making that happen.
And then, he says, he will
negotiate with
Mexico on picking up the tab.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, finally,
John, he and
his press spokesman had plenty
to say about
the press, about -- in the wake
of the story
today about the Russian intel
report on him.
JOHN YANG: That's right, Judy.
It wouldn't be a Trump press
conference without
a little press bashing.
Interestingly enough, he started
out by saying
how glad he was to be there
holding a press
conference.
He sounded almost nostalgic for
news conferences.
He even credited news
conferences for winning
the nomination for him.
But then things turned tense
later in the
session when he refused to take
a question
from Jim Acosta of CNN.
CNN has been reporting very
aggressively on
this allegation that Russia has
compromising
information about the
president-elect.
DONALD TRUMP: CNN going out of
their way to
build it up, it's a disgrace.
JIM ACOSTA, CNN: Sir, since
you're attacking
us, can you give us a question?
Mr. President-elect...
DONALD TRUMP: Go ahead.
Go ahead.
JIM ACOSTA: Mr. President-elect,
since you
are attacking our news
organization...
DONALD TRUMP: No, not you.
JIM ACOSTA: ... can you give us
a chance?
DONALD TRUMP: Your organization
is terrible.
JIM ACOSTA: You are attacking
our news organization.
DONALD TRUMP: Your organization
is terrible.
JIM ACOSTA: Can you give us a
chance to ask
a question, sir?
Sir, can you...
DONALD TRUMP: Go ahead.
Quiet.
JIM ACOSTA: Mr. President-elect,
can you say...
(CROSSTALK)
DONALD TRUMP: She's asking a
question.
Don't be rude.
JIM ACOSTA: Can you give us a
question since
you're attacking us?
Can you give us a question?
DONALD TRUMP: Don't be rude.
No, I'm not going to give you a
question.
I'm not going to give you a
JIM ACOSTA: Can you state...
DONALD TRUMP: You are fake news.
Go ahead.
JIM ACOSTA: Sir, can you...
JOHN YANG: Since then, CNN has
pointed out
that they have refrained from
reporting on
the details of the alleged
dossier, unlike
BuzzFeed, because CNN hasn't
been able to
independently verify any of the
information.
But, in any case, Judy, it looks
lie it's
going to be an interesting four
years in the
White House Briefing Room.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's right,
John.
The president-elect had strong
words for both
BuzzFeed and CNN.
John Yang reporting from just
outside Trump
Tower, thank you.
STEVE INSKEEP: The
president-elect, as we
have heard, took some questions
about his
relationship with Russia.
And many more questions today
went to his
choice for secretary of
state.
Margaret Warner has been
watching the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee
hearing.
MARGARET WARNER: Rex Tillerson
was nearly
obscured by the mob of cameras
as he settled
in for the marathon session.
Senators quickly focused on the
topic of Russia.
Did Tillerson, as chairman and
CEO of ExxonMobil,
have too cozy a relationship
with Russian
President Vladimir Putin?
Florida Republican Marco Rubio:
SEN.
MARCO RUBIO (R), Florida: Is
Vladimir Putin
a war criminal?
REX TILLERSON, Secretary of
State Nominee:
I wouldn't use that term.
SEN.
MARCO RUBIO: In Aleppo, Mr.
Putin has directed
his military to conduct a
devastating campaign.
He's targeted schools, markets.
It's resulted in the death of
thousands of
civilians.
This is not the first time Mr.
Putin is involved
in campaigns of this kind.
REX TILLERSON: Those are very,
very serious
charges to make, and I would
want to have
much more information before
reaching a conclusion.
(CROSSTALK)
REX TILLERSON: I would want to
be fully informed
before advising the president.
SEN.
MARCO RUBIO: Well, are you aware
that people
who oppose Vladimir Putin wind
up dead all
over the world, poisoned, shot
in the back
of the head?
And do you think that was
coincidental, or
do you think that it is quite
possible or
likely, as I believe, that they
were a part
of an effort to murder his
political opponents?
REX TILLERSON: Well, people who
speak up for
freedom in regimes that are
repressive are
often at threat, and these
things happen to
them.
In terms of assigning specific
responsibilities,
I would have to have more
information.
SEN.
MARCO RUBIO: None of this is
classified, Mr.
Tillerson.
These people are dead.
MARGARET WARNER: Tillerson, at
ExxonMobil,
brokered multibillion-dollar
deals with Russia,
meeting with Putin multiple
times.
In 2013, he received the Order
of Friendship
award from Putin himself.
But Tillerson today said he'd
support continuing
sanctions against Russia for
now.
He also implied his intimate
knowledge of
Russia meant he understood its
strategy, and
could anticipate its moves, to
America's benefit.
REX TILLERSON: Do you want this
to get worse?
Or does Russia desire a
different relationship?
We're not likely to ever be
friends.
But I also know the Russian
people, because
of having spent so many years in
Russia.
There is scope to define a
different relationship
that can bring down the
temperature around
the conflicts we have today.
MARGARET WARNER: Outside the
hearing and inside,
protesters called on senators to
reject the
nominee for his big oil ties.
Tillerson promised to recuse
himself for a
year from any decisions that
would affect
ExxonMobil.
REX TILLERSON: My love of
country and my patriotism
is going to dictate that I serve
no one's
interests but that of the
American people
in advancing our own national
security.
MARGARET WARNER: Climate change
was also at
issue.
As candidate, president-elect
Trump called
it a hoax, and promised to pull
out of the
new Paris agreement on
greenhouse gas emissions.
At Exxon, Tillerson did oversee
the company's
shift from vigorously denying
climate change
to acknowledging it.
Today, he did the same, with a
caveat.
REX TILLERSON: I came to the
conclusion a
few years ago that the risk of
climate change
does exist.
SEN.
BOB CORKER (R), Tennessee: You
believe that
human activity, based on your
belief and the
science, is contributing to
climate change?
REX TILLERSON: The increase in
the greenhouse
gas concentrations in the
atmosphere are having
an effect.
Our ability to predict that
effect is very
limited.
MARGARET WARNER: At steps along
the way, Tillerson
showed he diverges with Mr.
Trump, as here
on NATO's response following
Russia's annexation
of Crimea from Ukraine.
SEN.
BEN CARDIN (D), Maryland: So,
your recommendation
would have been to do a more
robust supply
of military?
REX TILLERSON: Yes, sir.
what -- I think what Russian
leadership would
have understood is a powerful
response that
indicated a, yes, you took the
Crimea, but
this stops right here.
SEN.
BEN CARDIN: And that's
encouraging to me to
hear you say that, because it's
not exactly
consistent with what Mr. Trump
has been saying.
MARGARET WARNER: Tillerson said
if Russia
invaded a NATO ally, he'd
support an alliance
response under Article V.
He had some tough words on
China, too, equating
its island-building in the South
China Sea
with Russia's annexation of
Crimea.
Mr. Trump's penchant for
announcing policy
on Twitter also came up.
REP.
TODD YOUNG (R), Indiana: So, how
do you finesse
this?
How would you ensure the legs
are not cut
out from underneath you as the
nation's chief
diplomat?
REX TILLERSON: Well, if
confirmed, and I am
able to serve this
president-elect, I don't
think I'm going to be telling
the boss how
he ought to communicate with
American people.
That's going to be his choice.
REP.
TODD YOUNG: Do you have in mind
any contingency
plans to address...
REX TILLERSON: Yes, I have his
cell phone
number.
REP.
TODD YOUNG: OK.
REX TILLERSON: And he's promised
me he will
answer.
MARGARET WARNER: Tillerson's
confirmation
hearing is set to continue
tomorrow morning.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Margaret Warner.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still to come on
the "NewsHour":
a look back on President Obama's
struggle
to cement his legacy on climate
change.
But first, in the rest of the
day's news:
This was the second and final
day of the confirmation
hearing for Jeff Sessions, the
Trump nominee
to be attorney general.
Black leaders have strongly
criticized the
Alabama senator.
And, as William Brangham
reports, their views
got a full airing today.
SEN.
CORY BOOKER (D), New Jersey: I
know it is
exceptional for a senator to
testify against
another senator
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Jeff Sessions
wasn't in
the room to hear it, but his
nomination drew
a rare rebuke from a Senate
colleague, Democrat
Cory Booker of New Jersey.
SEN.
CORY BOOKER: He will be expected
to defend
the equal rights of gay and
lesbian and transgender
Americans, but his record
indicates that he
won't.
He will be expected to defend
voting rights,
but his record indicates that he
won't.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Georgia
Congressman and
civil rights icon John Lewis
also spoke against
the nomination.
REP.
JOHN LEWIS (D), Georgia: It
doesn't matter
how Senator Sessions may smile,
how friendly
he may be, how he may speak to
you, but we
need someone who's going to
stand up, speak
up, and speak out for the people
that need
help, for people who have been
discriminated
against.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Three black
officials who
worked with Sessions in the past
gave their
support to the attorney
general-designate.
MAN: Senator Sessions is
unquestionably qualified
for the job.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And a former
attorney general,
Michael Mukasey, came to his
defense as well.
MICHAEL MUKASEY, Former U.S.
Attorney General:
Principled, intelligent,
knowledgeable, thorough,
modest, and thoroughly dedicated
to the rule
of law and to the mission of the
department,
which is to enforce the law and
to preserve
our freedoms.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Sessions is
ultimately expected
to win easy confirmation in the
Senate.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham.
STEVE INSKEEP: Amid the
president's Cabinet
choices from outside Washington,
there are
some from well inside.
His choice for transportation
secretary is
Elaine Chao.
She served two previous
presidents.
And she testified today with her
husband Mitch
McConnell behind her.
She spoke of using private money
to build
up public infrastructure.
ELAINE CHAO, Secretary of
Transportation-Designate:
We all know that the government
doesn't have
the resources to do it all.
It's also important to recognize
that the
way we build and deliver
projects is just
as important as how much we
invest.
STEVE INSKEEP: Now, Chao's words
hint at a
potential political conflict.
The president-elect says he
wants big spending
on roads and bridges and
airports.
Democrats do too, but some
Republicans fought
that spending when President
Obama wanted
it, and they don't agree yet on
how to pay
for it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President-elect
Trump also
today announced his nominee for
secretary
of Veterans Affairs.
David Shulkin is currently the
department's
top health official, managing
1,700 facilities
that treat nine million
veterans.
In a statement, Shulkin said he
is eager to
begin reforming a system plagued
by long wait
lines -- times.
STEVE INSKEEP: A federal judge
today formally
sentenced Dylann Roof to death
for killing
nine black worshipers at a
church in Charleston,
South Carolina.
A jury agreed on the sentence
yesterday.
Now, Roof stared straight ahead
today as relatives
of some of the victims said they
forgive him,
but one called his name and
finally shouted
in frustration, "I wish you
would look at
me, boy."
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Afghanistan,
the death toll
climbed past 50 in Tuesday's
bombings in Kabul
and Kandahar.
Five diplomats from the United
Arab Emirates
died in the attack in Kandahar.
The Persian Gulf state's
ambassador was among
the wounded.
The Taliban claimed the Kabul
bombing, but
there's been no claim in the
Kandahar incident.
STEVE INSKEEP: In other news,
Volkswagen agreed
today to plead guilty to
criminal charges.
The company will also pay $4.3
billion in
fines for cheating on emissions.
It's part of a plea bargain with
the U.S.
Justice Department.
A grand jury has indicted six
high-ranking
V.W. employees for allegedly
lying to regulators
and destroying evidence, among
other charges.
Federal prosecutors say at least
40 people
took part in the fraud and the
cover-up.
LORETTA LYNCH, U.S. Attorney
General: This
is a case that illustrates a
company that
at very high levels knew of this
problem and
deliberately chose to continue
with this fraudulent
behavior.
And that's one reason why the
actions taken
here are so severe and do
devolve on individuals.
STEVE INSKEEP: We should mention
that Volkswagen
already settled civil charges
related to the
emissions cheating for $15
billion.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Eastern Europe is
struggling
to cope with a blast of bitter
cold and heavy
snow.
Officials report at least 73
deaths in recent
days.
Temperatures have hit minus-14
in parts of
the Balkans, the coldest in more
than 50 years.
And, in Greece, medical
officials warned of
inhuman conditions at migrant
camps.
Meanwhile, in Northern
California, rescue
crews used boats to reach
stranded people
after the heaviest rain in a
decade.
Thousands more have been urged
to evacuate
ahead of the floods.
STEVE INSKEEP: And on Wall
Street, oil prices
went up, and so did stocks.
For weeks now, people have been
waiting for
the Dow to climb over 20000.
It hasn't quite happened yet.
It gained 98 points today to
close at 19954.
The Nasdaq rose 11 points, and
the S&P 500
added six.
environment
STEVE INSKEEP: And finally
tonight, we continue
our series about The Obama
Years.
In his farewell address last
night, the president
spoke of his actions against
climate change,
including a global accord to
reduce emissions.
He did more as his time in
office went on,
despite opponents who criticized
the costs
or doubted the science.
Miles O'Brien reports, as part
of our weekly
look at the Leading Edge of
science and technology.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
And that's why I invited Luther,
my anger
translator, to join me here
tonight.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
MILES O'BRIEN: In the long,
heated debate
over global warming, this was a
night to remember.
BARACK OBAMA: But we do need to
stay focused
on some big challenges, like
climate change.
KEEGAN-MICHAEL KEY, Actor: Hey,
listen, you
all, if you haven't noticed,
California is
bone-dry.
MILES O'BRIEN: At the White
House Correspondents
Dinner in 2015, Barack Obama
became the first
president to openly scorn
climate change deniers,
with the help of comedian
Keegan-Michael Key
playing the president's anger
translator,
Luther.
BARACK OBAMA: Instead of doing
anything about
it, we have got elected
officials throwing
snowballs in the Senate.
KEEGAN-MICHAEL KEY: OK.
OK.
I think I got it, bro.
BARACK OBAMA: It is crazy.
What about our kids?
What kind of stupid,
shortsighted, irresponsible
bull...
KEEGAN-MICHAEL KEY: Whoa, whoa,
whoa, whoa,
whoa!
Hey!
(LAUGHTER)
MILES O'BRIEN: By all accounts,
the president's
frustration and anger were real.
CAROL BROWNER, Former Assistant
to the President
for Energy and Climate Change: I
think that
this president believes that
climate change
is real.
He believes there is a moral and
ethical imperative
to act.
And he has taken the laws on the
books and
implemented them to their
fullest.
MILES O'BRIEN: Carol Browner ran
the Environmental
Protection Agency in the '90s.
She joined the Obama White House
as a senior
adviser.
She helped guide the
administration as it
aggressively employed existing
laws to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions.
They raised the bar on mileage
for automakers,
made appliances more efficient
and tried to
control carbon dioxide emissions
at power
plants as if it were any other
kind of pollutant.
CAROL BROWNER: He said, "This is
a serious
problem, and I am committed to
taking every
step."
MILES O'BRIEN: But, for Browner,
the rule
changes were a consolation
prize.
She came to the White House to
shepherd a
sweeping climate change bill
through Congress.
CAROL BROWNER: We had looked
economy-wide
to look at all sources of carbon
pollution.
At the time, it really seemed
like the thoughtful
and wise thing to do, because,
obviously,
this is an economy-wide problem.
MILES O'BRIEN: She envisioned an
economy-wide
cap-and-trade system that would
have set a
nationwide limit, or cap, on
greenhouse gas
emissions.
Companies would be granted
allowances to produce
these climate-altering gases.
Those that produced less than
their allowance
could sell or trade permits to
emit more to
companies that could not reach
the goal.
But the American Clean Energy
and Security
Act of 2009, sponsored by
Democrats Henry
Waxman and Ed Markey, ran into a
political
buzz saw.
Economist Douglas Holtz-Eakin is
the president
of the American Action Forum and
a veteran
of the John McCain presidential
campaign.
DOUGLAS HOLTZ-EAKIN, Former
Congressional
Budget Office Director: It was a
very intrusive,
heavily regulatory bill, where
literally,
at the key moment, John Boehner
literally
went to the podium, started
flipping through
and reading pages randomly, and
he could find
something bad on everyone.
REP.
JOHN BOEHNER (R-OH), House
Minority Leader:
Twenty percent of the
electricity that goes
into every federal agency has to
come from
renewable sources.
Do we have any idea whether this
is possible?
I can't find the answer here.
MILES O'BRIEN: The money that
would change
hands in cap-and-trade was
supposed to stay
in the private sector, not go to
the U.S.
Treasury.
But in its first budget message
to Congress,
the administration implied it
would auction
the emission allowances to
companies, making
it look like a tax.
ROBERT STAVINS, Harvard
University: Some staffers
on the Hill or someone saw that,
and within
six months, cap-and-trade became
labeled as
cap-and-tax.
MILES O'BRIEN: Robert Stavins is
the director
of the Environmental Economics
Program at
Harvard.
ROBERT STAVINS: And that was the
theme that
conservative Republicans and
coal state Democrats
used to fight against
Waxman-Markey in the
House of Representatives and to
stop it in
the Senate.
MAN: I sued the EPA, and I will
take dead
aim at the cap-and-trade bill,
because it's
bad for West Virginia.
MILES O'BRIEN: The cap-and-trade
climate bill
passed in the House in 2009.
MAN: The bill is passed.
MILES O'BRIEN: But it never even
reached the
floor of the Senate for a vote.
DOUGLAS HOLTZ-EAKIN: Had they
scaled it back
and answered the question, what
can we get
the votes for, that would have
been very different
than Waxman-Markey.
MILES O'BRIEN: After Democrats
lost control
of the House in the 2010 midterm
elections,
the administration's lawmaking
prospects were
fading.
So, Mr. Obama started issuing
executive orders
aimed at reducing greenhouse
gases.
John Holdren is the president's
science adviser.
JOHN HOLDREN, Director, White
House Office
of Science and Technology
Policy: I think
it was the only sensible
decision to make,
to ask, what can we do using
executive authority
to carry us until we get a
Congress that's
more willing to consider these
kinds of actions?
MILES O'BRIEN: The biggest of
these rule-making
steps was the Clean Power Plan.
BARACK OBAMA: The single most
important step
America has ever taken in the
fight against
global climate change.
(APPLAUSE)
MILES O'BRIEN: It uses the Clean
Air Act,
first enacted in 1963, to
control other pollutants
to encourage states to reduce
carbon dioxide
emissions generated by the
electric utilities.
CHELSEA HENDERSON, republicEn: I
think it
was his only chess move, at that
point.
MILES O'BRIEN: Chelsea Henderson
is with an
organization called republicEn,
conservatives
who are seeking government
action on climate
change.
CHELSEA HENDERSON: In the end, I
would have
liked to have seen him overreach
earlier in
the legislative process, rather
than on the
regulatory side.
MILES O'BRIEN: Twenty-seven
states took the
Obama administration to court to
try and stop
the plan.
Early last year, the Supreme
Court ordered
the EPA not to enforce it.
JOHN HOLDREN: I think the
president did the
best he had with the tools he
had, which were
the tools of executive
authority.
I don't think he exceeded the
legal extent
of those tools.
But those are questions that
will continue
to be tested in the courts
obviously, and
some of them may be tested in
the Congress.
MILES O'BRIEN: And, of course,
executive orders
that can be enacted with the
stroke of a presidential
pen can be undone in similar
fashion.
But Mr. Obama's defenders say
changing existing
rules was a more nimble tool
than passing
new laws.
CAROL BROWNER: If we had waited
to start the
existing law, cars wouldn't have
gotten more
efficient for at least another
year or two.
And, more importantly, the
president wouldn't
have had the kind of efficiency
standards,
the proposal on power plants
that then allowed
us to go to Paris and really
establish our
leadership.
MILES O'BRIEN: Paris, the site
of a pivotal
meeting of 195 nations that led
to an agreement
to curb greenhouse gas
emissions, limiting
the increase in the global
average temperature
to two degrees Celsius or below,
it is the
first comprehensive climate
agreement in history.
JOHN HOLDREN: It happened only
because the
United States and China stood up
together.
President Obama and President Xi
in Beijing
in November 2014 stood up, said:
We're the
two biggest economies, we're the
two biggest
emitters.
This is a huge problem.
We are jointly going to lead.
MILES O'BRIEN: U.S.
participation in the Paris
agreement cannot be quickly
revoked.
A withdrawal has to be announced
three years
in advance, and then it takes
another year
for it to become official.
But the agreement is voluntary,
with no teeth,
besides global peer pressure.
And there is a loophole.
ROBERT STAVINS: If the Trump
administration
decided instead not just to
remove itself
from the Paris climate
agreement, but from
the overall U.N. Framework
Convention on Climate
Change that goes back to 1992,
ratified by
the Senate, signed by Republican
President
George H.W. Bush, that takes
only one-year
delay.
MILES O'BRIEN: Barack Obama
leaves a climate
legacy that is bold, yet
fragile.
History will likely remember him
as the first
climate president, but, in
today's political
climate, that moniker could very
quickly become
a footnote.
Miles O'Brien, the "PBS
NewsHour," Washington.
STEVE INSKEEP: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Steve Inskeep.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's great to
have you
here.
STEVE INSKEEP: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
It is -- we're going to tell you
all to join
us online and right here again
tomorrow night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.